So hi, I'm Joe Roberts. I am the product manager here at Posit and I want to talk
today about how to save time and pain with Posit Public Package Manager. So
what we're going to talk about today is, you know, obviously what is public
package manager if you haven't heard of it before. And then we're going to talk about
some of those common package pain points that you have dealing with packages in
R particularly, but we'll talk about others as well. And then how you
can move public package manager if you want to for your repository.
But first we need to start with CRAN. And you all, I know you all love CRAN
whether you know it or not. I know that some of you, you know, CRAN is the
official home for over 20,000 user-contributed R packages like many
that we've seen here. And what's great is that installing packages just works with
R's installed R packages. When you know it or not, when you hit type
installed R packages or do it from the IDE, you're going out to CRAN generally to
get those packages, download them, and bring them back in and install them. And
my hot take today is that the biggest reason that R has become so popular for
data science is exactly because of that. Because it's so easy to go to CRAN, get
new packages that extend the use of R to so many great useful things in data
science. CRAN does this through dozens of CRAN mirrors that are provided all
across the globe. And to that, we have our own way of dealing with CRAN. We
call Posit Public Package Manager. We'll refer to it a lot as P3M, those three P's
in the M, just to make it short and simple there. But what Public Package
Manager is, is a free hosted service based on our professional Posit
Package Manager product that has a lot more features. But our Public Package
Manager provides everything in those complete CRAN mirrors that you would
normally use by default by going to get anything going, plus many additional
features. Public Package Manager has been used widely in the R community
since 2020 when we first introduced it. And we get over 40 million package
installs from Public Package Manager every month. And really, we designed it,
and the reason we put it out there is to address the common pain points of using
those public mirrors like CRAN. And so, let's talk first about what some of
those pain points are. Let's see if anyone can relate to any of these here.
How about the first one? My code used to work, but now it doesn't. Maybe you
say, I wrote this code two years ago, but I got a new laptop. I'm trying to,
I saved my, I seem to get there, but I can't get the same results on my new
laptop because something's changed. Maybe I updated one package to get some
new functionality, and everything broke, and now my whole project doesn't run.
Why do these things happen? Well, several reasons could be for the case there.
One, new versions of those packages may have changes that break old code.
Most CRAN R package authors are pretty good at keeping backwards compatibility,
so you update to a new version, old code should still work, but it's not perfect,
and sometimes they intentionally break things to enable better functionality
down the road. Similarly, dependent packages may be out of date. So, even
though you updated one package, it may expect functions that are in newer
versions of other packages that you aren't, that isn't aware of there.
Because CRAN itself only guarantees package compatibility between packages
at any given latest point in time. So, that's, if you install all these
packages at the exact same time from the same date, they should all work
together right, and they're tested, they're validated, do that there. But if
you have them, one installed last week, one installed two months ago, and
you're mixing and matching that way, you can get out of sync in ways that
just break. And third, what we see even more frequently on CRAN, sometimes
CRAN packages just disappear. They take them off, they get removed for whatever
reason, and maybe you can't recreate that in the new. So, how we help with
P3M. So, what we do at Posit is we take daily snapshots of CRAN, we also do
it for PyPI and Bioconductor, and you can actually configure on your side
then, R to install packages from a specific date, ensuring that even if
that date is not the today, like the like you can do by just getting the
latest, you can go back and say, I want all the packages from February 18th,
2023, because that's what I have this year, I can do that there. And then,
if you reinstall all those packages from that snapshot in your repository,
at least all those packages will be the same, at least compatible with each
other, as far as that goes there. And just pretty close there. So, you can
use those, for example, to recreate the package environment for an old project
from your old laptop that crashed. As long as you know roughly when the
project was written, you can get pretty close by doing it that way, usually.
But more importantly, you can also future-proof your work by tying it to
today's snapshot and saying, I want to always use this snapshot, and I'll
manually choose when I want to upgrade these later. But that way, if you're
sharing with someone else saying, here, here's my code, install all the
packages from this snapshot so you have the same things that I built it on
when you try to reproduce it yourself. Next pain point, installing packages is
really slow. And we see this in certain environments. You may recognize this
if you are using Posit Workbench or some other Linux-based environment where
it's just sent to be slower for whatever reasons we'll talk about.
Maybe you need to use an older R version. Maybe for whatever reason you
can't use R44, you need to use R36 even still, or 4.0, because whether it's
compatibility, whether it's policy issues or whatever reasons you have in
your environment, you still need to use older R. Or maybe you're using Docker
containers and deploying it in there, and your containers take forever to
build every time you try to build them. So, there's several reasons why this
happens. One, installing packages from source is slow. And most packages, so
any source package is where how most are natively available on CRAN, and it
may contain C, C++, Fortran code that has to be compiled, which takes some
time. Other packages, some packages require additional libraries in order to
do that or build tools that make it hard. You have to install all this extra
software just to build the package. Still, there's the concept of binary
packages, which basically pre-compile all of that work for you. And just, and
when you go, then you can just download just your pre-built package that has
everything ready to go, and then just unzip it and go. And CRAN, unfortunately,
only provides binary packages for Windows and Mac, and only on the current
and previous version of R. So, if you're on Windows and Mac, you probably don't
run into this specific problem very often, if you're on a relatively recent
version of R. But in different environments, different combinations,
this still can be an issue. So, again, how does package manager help? We provide
pre-built binaries for all of CRAN on not just the current and last release,
but the current and five old releases. So, we actually do provide binary
packages for all the way back to R3-6 right now. We do it for Windows and Mac
and on 12 different Linux distributions. So, this actually gives a, for like
wherever you're running Workbench, most Docker containers are built on, you know,
any number of these different Linux distributions that can really speed up
the time here. And it's also, it's also complete for a lot of the cloud compute
environments, snowflakes, Databricks, because those are tend to be Linux-based
containerized environments otherwise, where, you know, you're installing packages
repetitively and it just, you're tired of it taking so long.
So, let's talk about why, you know, when it takes, why this is so important here.
So, what we do, say, let's take a snapshot. This is a snapshot of CRAN from today,
let's say. We, these are, there was, these were the new packages were added to
CRAN today. So, we every day, we'll look at CRAN, we will go, oh, well, we also then
need to look at all the reverse dependencies of the packages, because in order to make
sure that the binaries are compatible, we need to make sure that any package that
depends on one of those packages is also rebuilt at the same time. You know,
reverse dependencies are, some have, most have a few, you know, you take, then you
take something like dplyr that has 3,500 reverse dependencies. So, that's a really
big major, it's a packages that we have to start rebuilding every, when one package
changes. Then, like I said, we take those, and then we do it on every single R
version that we support. So, we have to replete that out six times to get all the
way out there. And then, we do that same combination for every distribution we
support, and then next, now we're down to like, you know, sometimes 10,000
packages we have to rebuild in a day in order just to keep these snapshots
compatible and binaries there. So, it's a lot that we do in there that we then
make available through public package manager so that you can actually save all
that time on your end and not have to build them yourself.
Installation-wise, then, we end up with, let's look at them side-by-side here.
You know, CRAN, I've got one of these is going to CRAN, one of these is going to
public package manager. They're both, obviously, download packages. This is
where I just picked TensorFlow because it has a handful of dependencies that take a
while to build. As you see on the CRAN side, it's going and it's doing all this
compiling. It's doing all this, lots of stuff on the screen. I'm doing this on
Ubuntu as Linux here just because it's where we actually see a major difference
there, and there's a lot of build chain there. Public package manager, downloading
all these packages, and then, oh, look, all it has to do is install them. It's
just unzip, install, install binary package, done, done, done, done, done.
And in 40 seconds, we've got public package manager done. I don't have enough
time in order to give me the hook off the stage if I let this finish on the CRAN
side, but it takes several minutes to get the same equivalent thing done, and
imagine if we have a whole lot more packages, it could be even worse.
So, moving to public package manager. We gave this a simple name as well, more
recently, to make it easy to find. No QR code because you can just remember
p3m.dev is the way to get to our public package manager offering. And when you
get there, you'll go to our public package manager page here. It's
relatively straightforward, we hope. We redesigned it to make it that way. And
one big setup button, three easy steps, and the one step setup button will take
you to our setup page. This gives us to an option, basically, we want to walk
you through very simply with a few questions about your environment to know
what's the right way to serve you the packages that you need. You know, your
operating system, if you're on Linux, what distribution you're on. This is
where you can select the snapshot that you actually want if you actually, you
know, if we want to use a specific database snapshot. If you say no to this,
you'll see the latest, just like you do on the public CRAN, which is also a good
way to start if you just want to get the latest and greatest. And then we'll ask
you a question about what environment you're running it in. That's just to help
give you the right information with some simple instructions for how to configure
your environment to update that repository URL to where you actually want
it to be. This repository URL is exactly what you actually are going to want to
then copy and paste. And then you'll put it into, for example, your RStudio IDE or
Repositron. You can set these options, repos in any, whatever R environment
you're in. In RStudio, there's the global options packages section. You can just
change that primary CRAN repository to public package manager. And again, we
provide instructions for all of the different, for various different ways.
And most places, most whatever you're using, if it's not in our instructions,
their instructions will tell you how to update your package repository or even,
or may say, you know, how to change your CRAN mirror you want to use there.
Short and simple is where we, you know, if you just want the apples to apples to
what the public mirror defaults are, p3m.dev slash CRAN slash latest gives you
the exact same thing you see there. And most importantly, we also have full
mirrors and snapshots of both PyPI. And we'll be releasing hot preview for Bob
snapshots for bioconductor later this week. So all things going there. So we'll
have those snapshots available on everything there.
Also, of course, feel free to explore around the public package manager website.
You can search about packages, see information a lot, and a lot cleaner. And
we think easier way to see it. And then browsing the CRAN website via Google
and including things like security vulnerabilities, especially useful on the
Python side is just get a quick rundown. If there are any issues with any versions
of these packages that you have. So I encourage you all to, if you haven't
already, try using positive public package manager today and see if it makes your
life any easier. And, you know, there's a lot more options we have as well in our
commercial product as well that can make life easier for teams and organizations.
So feel free to stop by the product station up by the lounge and we'd love to
chat more. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Joe. And I will say, I do love p3m.dev. I can never remember public
package manager. It's like too many characters. But, yeah, just for a few
questions. Yeah. I'll stand out and look. Yeah. There's only so much room on the
podium. So our first question is why use package manager over something like
Rn or can they be used together? They absolutely can be used together. In fact,
Rn that you if you have a if you have Linux, if you're using a Linux environment
and are restoring Rn will generally try to even find if you're using public
package manager will automatically try to find the Linux binaries for those
packages as well. But yes, certainly these are companion to those package
management tools like pack or Rn or or any various other places there. OK, great.
Thank you. Does p3m provide pre-built binaries for different architectures
like Intel versus Apple Silicon Macs? In certain cases, yes, but we're trying to
expand that on some parts there. So we we have. Yes. Yes. OK, so I can try to
arm on Linux. That's the one you said. Sorry, Linux. We're still working on
Linux arm, but but expanding as we go there and definitely reach out and give
us more feedback on what we actually want to see more of if that's the case there.
OK, having set up p3m multiple times recently, I can attest the website makes
it trivially easy to do. Thank you. I guess it's not really. I'll take it.
Is this a gratis thing or a purchasable product? Looks like they're what we're
already paying for as a corporate posit product. What's the difference, if any?
So everything in public package manager is the the is available if you already have it,
if you've purchased our commercial public, our commercial package manager product at any level
there. What we you know, what public package manager is just a scaled down version that
just includes the public mirrors as well as the binary packages and snapshots. Everything else
on the commercial offerings add in things like support for bringing your own your own internally
built packages, additional package security features and a lot more, you know, administrative
governance features on top of that. OK, and this question is not on the list,
but it just came to me, I was wondering about IPI support.
IPI, we have support as well. IPI and Bioconductor now, as I said,
snapshots for Bioconductor coming later this week in an update.
PIPI support, we have snapshots just the same way we have for for CRAN.
We don't have we don't build our own binaries for for PIPI, though, because mainly most binaries
are built and binary wheels are already available on PIPI for most things there.
And so there's not a lot of added value. Plus, there's like 400,000 projects on PIPI,
and that's a lot of work to build a lot of packages, so.
OK, well, thank you, Joe Roberts.
Glad to have a chance that now we're going to hear Aaron talk.